# September 16, 2016

- See (proposed) lecture topic schedule on course website
- Talk to me if you haven't figured out your semester project yet
- Homework: Finish exercises in [Ch4.v](../code/Ch4.v),
  [Ch5.v](../code/Ch5.v) and [Ch6.v](../code/Ch6.v) by Monday,
  Sept 19th.
  You do not neeed to do the Challenge exercises (but are strongly
  encouraged to do so).
  If you are still new to Coq you may prove these lemmas on paper
- Questions: don't forget to send before each class!

# Plan

- Today
   + [Ch4.v](../code/Ch4.v) (renaming, exists fresh, more Cofinite Quant discussion)
	+ [Transitions.v](../code/Transitions.v) and [Ch5.v](../code/Ch5.v) (5.1-5.2)
	+ Sneak preview for Ch7 (Evaluation dynamics)

- Thursday 
   + Preservation & progress for small step semantics
	  [Ch6.v](../code/Ch6.v) (6.1-6.2) and discussion of
	  bigstep semantics [Ch7.v](../code/Ch7.v) (7.1-7.3).
	
- Next week: I am away at ICFP all week, no lectures
   + read Chapters 8 and 9 on your own
	+ complete exercises in [Ch9.v](../code/Ch9.v)

- Following week
   + We will start student lectures
   + Solomon will cover Ch9 and Ch10 on Tuesday

# Questions


## Questions about co-finite quantification & induction modulo renaming

+ 1) why we could define both cofinite quantification and exists-fresh
     version of typing rule for let?
  2) What does admissible mean for let ?

+ I am not clear about the meaning of `L` in the definition of `lc_let`. Is
  there any specific meaning of `L`? What will be the problem if `L` is empty?

+ I'm kind of confused by the induction principle stated in PFPL. It seems
  weird that P is parametrized by X because it suggests that the proposition
  might change depending on the variables you pass in, which seems like
  something you'd want to disallow.

  I think you could set P to be `E -> Prop` with a pre-determined countable set
  of variables, and had an equivalent induction principle like this, using
  cofinite induction:

         forall x, P x
         forall n, P n
         forall s, P s
         forall x x' e1 e2, exists X: x' notin X ->
              P e1 -> P ( [ x' / x ] e2 ) -> P (let x be e1 in e2)
         forall e1 e2, P e1 -> P e2 -> P (e1 `op` e2)

   What are the advantages of the approach taken in PFPL?

+ Is structural induction modulo fresh renaming a generalization of
  cofinite quantification?

+ In defining the judgements of local closure, we used co-finite
  quantification to acquire a stronger induction hypothesis in the lc_let
  case. From a mechanical point of view, I understand the purpose of L, but I
  was wondering if there's some intuitive interpretation we can apply to it?

  For example, later on when Ch4.v talked about the induction principles of
  ABTs, the set of free variables X indexing each ABT acts like L, and it has an
  interpretation being the set of free variables that can appear in this ABT,
  but I'm having some trouble wrapping my head around whether I can think about
  L in the same way. I believe that in practice, L can be chosen to be any set
  larger than (fv e2) (set of free variables in the let body), but is that an
  appropriate way to think about it?

+ Was the motivation for cofinite quantification due to technical difficulties
encountered when formalizing metatheory, like the one in the tutorial? It
isn't clearly a priori that the initial definition would run into trouble
later on. It is worrisome that one may go about doing quite a lot of work
before finding out that something at the root should be better revised. I
suppose one could patch this by gluing on statements expressing some form of
equivalence, but that's hardly ideal.

For example, one possibility of defining local closure is to count the number
of binders from the variable to the root. How do we choose the "right"
strategy for such?

+ Apart from proving alpha-equivalence, what are other fields that
structural induction modulo fresh renaming can be used?

+ In the notes it's stated that the renaming operation [x <~> y] replaces
  every instance of x with y and every instance of y with x. Typically we seem
  to use this operation when y is free, is there a situation we'd need it when
  x and y both appear in the expression?

+ I reviewed the concepts of renaming and substitution. I wonder if they
  can define each other as follows:

        forall e, forall fresh z, [ x ~> y ] e = [ z <~> y ] [ x <~> z ] e.

        forall e, forall fresh z, [ x <~> y ] e = [ z ~> y ] [ y ~> x ] [ x ~> z ] e.

  If yes, can all the properties of one operation derive from those of another?


## Other questions about Chapter 4

+ PFPL Ch.4 discussed a lemma called “inversion for typing”, and it says:” In
  richer languages such inversion principles are more difficult to state and to
  prove.” What’s the example of such a “richer language”?

## Other questions about Chapter 5

+ In the section of equational dynamics, the book mentioned that we can't
  prove n1 + n2 === n2 + n1 because of the lack of induction principle.
  Does the book here mean that we can't introduce an induction principle out of
  the equational reasoning rules? Why is this a challenge? And if so, why is it
  more difficult than introducing an induction principle for something like
  typing judgements that we developed earlier?

+ My question for the class is the advantages of using contextual dynamics over
  structural dynamics. The book says that all transitions in contextual dynamics
  are between complete programs. What does this mean? Moreover, what is the
  observable type?

+ Chapter 5 of PFPL spends a lot of time discussing equational dynamics. What's
  the advantage of stating things this way? The text states that we can
  determine the value of an expression using simplification and substitution,
  but this seems true of structural dynamics as well.

## Questions about Coq

1. In Coq, unlike Agda, there are functions and theorems. I think of both of
them as the same. One possible advantage of having theorems might be that we
don't need to write the arguments. But I noticed that at times Coq fails to
infer them. So what's the use in having this distinction?

2. In Coq, I have not yet seen the bot type (contradiction). I find it harder
to prove contradictions in the premises. Sometimes Coq forms terms in the
premises which cannot be formed according to the definitions given and I can't
figure out a way to tell Coq that these terms do not exist.

3. The tactics in Coq are powerful. I could not yet fully understand their
behaviour. Sometimes they are successful, sometimes they are not. I looked at
the documentation online, but it's way too much of information. Also I found
their behaviour to be non-linear, for example, induction H. auto. is not the
same as induction H; auto. Can you suggest something in this regard?
