# Sept 27, 2016
# Presenter: Solomon Maina

- SCW Office hours: Wednesday morning, 9-11

- Submit Ch9.v (only 1 person has so far). But don't stress; homework is
  intended to be diagnostic. If you are having trouble, come see me and we
  will work through it.

- Don't forget to send questions (7/12 did today)

- Make sure you are using the second edition, and you are reading Chapters
  not Parts.



=========================================================================



# Notes about Ch 9 & 10.

Questions about primitive recursion?  Especially how it is implemented in Coq
in systemt.ott?

Ott can only bind 1 variable per rule, so I pushed the "y" variable into the
e1 term by requiring it to be a function value.  (Requiring it to be a value
is not actually necessary, but better matches the book.)

       G |- e : nat
       G |- e0 : t
       G , x : nat |- e1 : t -> t
       e1 val
       ----------------------------------------- :: rec
       G |- rec e { z -> e0 ; s x -> e1 } : t

# Solomon's lecture

Plan
1. Introduce products
2. Goedel's System T review and primitive recursion
3. Why products?

## Products

Start with language from before and add new type forms for unit and products:

     t ::= nat | t1 -> t2 | unit | t1 * t2

For expressions,

     e ::= ... | ()               -- unit, represents "nothing"  the empty product
	            | (e1,e2)          -- constructs products
					| e . l | e . r    --

New rules for products (Statics)

       G |- e1 : t1          G |- e2 : t2
		 ----------------------------------- (A)
		 G |- (e1,e2) : t1 * t2


       G |- e : t1 * t2               G |- e : t1 * t2
		 ----------------               ----------------
		 G |- e.l : t1                    G |- e.r : t2

Omar's question: why have unit in your programming language? Why did Bob
include them in this chapter?

       (Dynamics, strict semantics)

       e1 -> e1'
		 --------
		 (e1, e2) -> (e1', e2)


		 e1 val		 e2 -> e2'
		 ---------------------
		 (e1, e2) -> (e1, e2')	


		 (e1,e2) val
		 --------------------
		 (e1,e2).l -> e1


		 (e1,e2) val
		 --------------------
		 (e1,e2).r -> e2
		 

		 e1 val       e2 val
		 -------------------
		    (e1, e2) val


## Progress and preservation

[Progress] 1. If empty |- e : t then either e is a value or there exists e', such that e -> e'

[Preservation] 2. If G |- e : t and e -> e', then G |- e' : t

Proofs are by structural induction.
Example of preservation proof:

    By induction on the stepping relation.
	 Example Case:

            e1 -> e1'
		 ---------------------
		 (e1, e2) -> (e1', e2)

     Assume  (e1,e2) : t  and that the above stepping rule applies.
	  We want to show that (e1', e2) : t.

     By inversion of rule (A), we know that t must be some t1 * t2, where
	  e1 : t1 and e2 : t2.
	  By induction hypothesis, we know that e1' : t1.
	  By rule (A) we know that (e1', e2) : t1 * t2.

Example of progress proof:

    By induction on the typing relation

	 e1 : t1    e2 : t2
	 -------------------
	 (e1,e2) : t1 * t2

	 If e1 is a value then either e2 is a value or not.
	 If e2 is a velue then the tuple is a velu
	 If e2 is not a value, then tuple steps to (e1,e2')
	 If e1 is not a value, then tuple steps to (e1',e2)

Generalization to n-ary products

Hengchu: We can build n-ary products out of binary products by nesting them.
Why would you choose one version of products over another.

## Goedel's System T and primitive recursion

See [PrimRec.v](../code/PrimRec.v)

## Why products?

Rec defines iteration just by forgetting the extra argument

      let G be fun f => fun m => fun r => f r

define:

      iter' A n z f = rec A n z (G f)

We can also define the opposite direction. See PrimRec file, plus
proof of equivalence of the versions.

# Questions from the class

## n-ary products

- I don’t understand why unit value should be considered a product.

  [ SCw: This part of the chapter is talking about products with n-ary components.
  For example, we can think about not just pairs

    (1, True) :: (Int, Bool)

  but triples

    (1, True, 'a') :: (Int, Bool, Char)

  and so on

    (1, True, 'a', "hello") :: (Int, Bool, Char, String)

  In general, a product can have n-components. What if n is zero?  Then we
  have unit.

    () :: ()


- I see that Ch10 is using product and tuple to define the types and
  expressions, in which the indexes are natural numbers. Is it possible that
  we use lists instead?

 [ SCW:  We can use any type that we want for indices, including natural numbers
 and string (i.e. labels, field names). Lists would also work, but are not standard.]


## Encoding rec with iter

- It would be good if the content of 10.3 could be covered and
  linked to the contents of ch9.

  [SCW: Solomon plans to cover this]

- What does it mean that using product types may simplify the primitive
  recursion construct of T? Is that because we get rid of a variable `y` in
  the definition of recursion? Will this also simplify the construct in Coq?

  [ SCW: It actually gets rid of the variable 'x', the predecessor, in the
    definition of the recursor. It will also simplify the construct in Coq
	 because there are fewer parts to the operator. ]


- Ch 8 begins like 'In the language E, we may perform calculations such as the
  doubling of a given expression, but we cannot express doubling as a concept
  in itself.' We could overcome this problem by adding function types. Now the
  question is, what have we gained by adding product types? More specifically,
  has the language become more expressive? Section 10.3 states that 'Using
  products we may simplify the primitive recursive construct of T ...'. So one
  advantage of adding product types is simplicity. Section 10.3 further
  discusses mutual primitive recursion. Is it impossible to implement mutual
  primitive recursion without product types? If not, what else have we gained
  other than simplicity?

  [SCW: good question. The answer depends on what you mean by "expressivity".
  If you are willing to do a whole-program transformation, it may be possible to
  implement primitive recursion without product types. I'll have to think
  about it.]

## Encoding multiple recursion

- I am wondering if all mutual recursions with n mutually recursive functions
   can be encoded with n-tuple types? Does that mean there is really no need
   to for any built-in semantics of mutual recursion for languages that we are
   developing?

   [ SCW: Solomon plans to cover this. ]

## Extensions of products with subtyping 

- In section 10.3, I wasn't sure if there was meant to be an implicit
  subtyping relationship in the discussion of typing products?
  If there are multiple different types with index sets that share some indices,
  does rule 10.3b mean we can use a value of any of those in the place of e?

[SCW: Yes.  If we have two different record types that share labels, then 10.3b
applies to both.

       type T1 = { l :: Int, k :: Char }
	    type T2 = { l :: Bool, j :: String }

   Then the expression  \x -> x.l   can be given type
	T1 -> Int  OR T2 -> Bool  OR  { l :: Int } -> Int  OR { l :: Bool } -> Bool.

   But this is not really subtyping as there is no declared relationship between
	types. ]


- After reading ch 10, I am wondering the case where the types of latter
  elements depend on the value of former elements. In this case, what should be
  changed for the static and dynamic rules? Does it mean that we need to
  evaluate the value according to the index order?

  [SCW: For the first question, see dependent types. In that case, the 
  binary product is written "Sigma x:tau1. tau2" so that tau2 can mention
  x, the value of first component. The typing rule requires a substitution
  when typing the second component:

       G |- e1 : tau1     G |- e2 : tau2 { e1 / x }
      -----------------------------------------------
       G |- < e1, e2 > : Sigma x:tau1. tau2

  There are two different elimination forms for Sigma types. The weak form
  uses pattern matching:

       G |- e1 : Sigma x:tau1. tau2
		 G, x:tau1, y:tau2 |- e2 : tau
		 G |- tau ok        (make sure x and y don't escape in tau)
      -----------------------------------
		G |- let (x, y) = e1 in e2 : tau

  The stronger form uses projections:

      G |- e : Sigma x:tau1. tau2              G |- e : Sigma x:tau1. tau2
     ----------------------------            ---------------------------------
      G |- fst e : tau1                        G |- snd e : tau2 { fst e / x } 

  As far as dynamics goes, things are best when <e1,e2> is nonstrict (i.e. doesn't
  evaluate either argument). ]

## ???

- The book states that the fixpoint operator allows us to solve "any set of
  recursion equations we like", which seems to suggest that any set of
  recursion equations has an associated functional. But there should be
  conditions on these equations:

  + E.g. f(0) = 0, f(n + 1) = 0 and f(n + 1) = 1 is an inconsistent system of
  recursion equations.
  
  + E.g. It's not clear what functional an equation like f(f(n + 1)) = f(f(n))
  has.

  The book probably just means defining equations in the form given in the
  factorial example, but something like f(n + 2) = f(n + 1) + f(n), f(0) = 1 =
  f(1) should work too (?).

  [SCW: Not sure what part of the book you are referring to. You are right that
  there are sets of equations with no solution; i.e. that do not define
  mathematical functions.]

================================



