# October 11, 2016

Speaker: Antoine Voizard
Topic: Constructive Logic

SCW office hours: Wed morning 9-11AM
Remember: project updates due 10/24

# Notes:

SCW: Bob states that preservation and progress hold, but I wanted to explore
the details of the latter lemma. (Note: this is an unusual lemma to prove for
logics; I've not seen it included in other papers on this topic.)

- Canonical forms lemma:
  If p is canonical (i.e. not "ccr") and |- p : phi then from phi we know the structure of p
  * |- p : True implies p is <>
  * |- p : False is impossible
  * |- p : phi1 /\ phi2 implies p is < p1, p2 >
  * |- p : phi1 \/ phi2 implies p is either l . p1 or l . p2
  * |- p : not phi implies p is not(k)
  * |- p : phi1 -> phi2  implies p is \x. p2

  If k is not "ccp" and |- k : phi then from phi we know the structure of k
  * |- k : True is impossible
  * |- k : False  implies k is abort
  * |- k : phi1 /\ phi2 implies k is either fst; k1 or snd; k2
  * |- k : phi1 \/ phi2 implies k is case( k1; k2 )
  * |- k : not phi implies k is not(p)
  * |- k : phi1 -> phi2  implies k is ap(p1);k2

- Progress lemma:
  * Pick reduction system that favors (13.5h) (i.e. eager dynamics)
  * if |- k # p then either k # p final or exists k' # p' s.t. k # p -> k' # p'.
  
  Proof:
  - suppose k # p is not final.  Then either p is not canonical or k is not "halt phi".
  In the first case, then p must be ccr u. k' # p'.  Then result steps by 13.5h.
  In the second case, p is canonical, but k is not halt.  If k is ccp, then
  the term steps by (13.5g). Otherwise, we have |- k : phi and |- p : phi.
  For each form of type phi, we can use canonical forms to know more about k and p.
  The case when phi is True or False is impossible. Otherwise, 
  in each case of phi, there is a rule in (13.5a)-(13.5f) that applies.

# Questions

- I didn't see elimination rules for ¬ in Chapter 13. How do we refute φ
  provided a proof of ¬φ?

  [SCW: if we have |- p : ¬φ and we want a refutation k that shows |- k ÷ φ
  we can use
     k =  ccp x. not (x) # p
  ]

- Section 13.2 begins like 'The price of achieving symmetry between truth and
  falsity in classical logic is that we must very often rely on the principle
  of indirect proof ... ' The examples presented henceforth all use indirect
  proofs. I am wondering whether there are non-trivial direct proofs (proof
  tree three or more layers deep) of interesting judgements in classical
  logic. That even judgements like 'a and b true => a true' require indirect
  proof shows that proof by contradiction is more prevalent than we might
  think.

  [SCW: good question. But, what does nontrivial mean in this context?
  We do have direct proofs like this one:

  \x.\y. l . <x,y> : A -> B -> (A /\ B) \/ C
  ]


- What is a canonical proof? Does it mean that there is no refutation
  appearing in the proof?

  [SCW: a canonical proof is one that is not headed by "ccr" (and there is an
  analogous definition for canonical refutation.)  However, a canonical proof
  could have a contradiction inside of it, just not at the top level. A canonical
  proof could even have refutation inside it, if it is headed by "not". ]
  
- How to correspond classical to proofs? The book says it is an abstract
  machine with a control stack. Could you give an example that? And could you
  further clarify the penalty of that?

  [SCW: See chapter 28. I think Bob must have reordered things, because there
  are some strange forward references.]

- When I see the first example in 13.2, I spend a lot of time trying to
  construct the refutation.  Is there an algorithm to build indirect proof?

  [SCW: An algorithm to build a proof would be a theorem prover. There is some
   work on polarity and focussing to structure the proof search --- ask
	Jennifer for details.]

- Near the start of Section 13.2, Bob makes the point that
  "this proof cannot be expressed in classical logic, because classical logic
  lacks the elimination forms of constructive logic"
  I don't quite understand this point - isn't this a problem with the formalism
  Bob has chosen, rather than classical logic itself?

  [SCW: Hmm. Yes, and no. The formalism that Bob has chosen has its own
  intrinsic value based on its symmetry and minimalism. So observations about
  this formalism are interesting.  However, you are right that Bob could have
  picked a different formalism to start with (for example, Parigot's lambda-mu
  calculus) that looks more like lambda-calculus. However, then there would
  be a different set of issues.]

- What does the preservation law and progress law mean for the proof dynamics
  defined in 13.3? Also, I would appreciate it if you can elaborate on the
  correspondence between classical proofs, and the interactions between
  expressions and context in programming.

  [SCW: Good question about proof dynamics. Preservation and progress are really
  weak properties from a logical point of view --- they don't show the consistency
  of the system. For connection with programming, see Chapter 28.]

- I'm trying to think of how the evaluation dynamics fit, especially with
the claim of the "proof changing its mind" after being "caught in its lie",
and of no longer needing to reveal which disjunct it proves. The whole
set-up strongly suggests an interactive game, but I'm not sure how it fits
with the evaluation dynamics.

If I am to take a stab at understanding this situation, it is suggested that
there are two parties, the Prover and the Context. I think of the Prover's job
as having to prove the claim, of course, but also that the Context's job as
having to refute the claim. Initially, they both pretend to have the proof and
refutation respectively, and the idea is that that they both want to keep these
secret. However, it is Prover's bad luck to have to start first, and to exhibit
his proof term.

The game state is k#p, where k is the Context's refutation and p is the Prover's
proof term. Both are always held abstract (secret), and the point of the proof
tree is to refine this term and show that it is indeed concrete. When Prover gets
stuck, he/she can challenge Context by saying that if the refutation exists,
then some P is true. This is invoked as ccr(u. k#p), where the Prover proves p
using the "current refutation".  But this proof is conditional on the Refuter's
possession of u. Not wanting to be "caught in its lie", the Refuter must go on
to refute P instead, by producing a refutation k. Now the burden of "proof" falls
on the Refuter, who gets to play forth in a symmetric fashion. The Refuter's
moves, as such, correspond to elimination forms of the syntax (specifying how to
refute); and the Prover's moves correspond to introduction forms.
They also nicely get to exchange proofs and refutations when there is a not.
The game ends when the Prover fully exhibits the proof term.

This looks like a plausible story which would explain the book's comments
partially, but perhaps not faithfully. It presents a nice symmetry between
truth and falsity. "Not having to reveal which disjunct it proves" can be explained
as throwing the challenge back to the Refuter, who must now instead refute
the Prover-chosen disjunct. "Not waiting to be caught in its lie" now applies to
both Prover and Refuter.

But the proof dynamics, while preserving this contradiction and tension
between the Prover and the Refuter, does not start off with the Prover's
state being abstract; it is fully concrete instead. I tried to graft the
Refuter's side of the story onto the proof tree, but I'm not precisely sure
of how. I also could see alternative ways of casting the whole thing as a game
as such, e.g. Prover and Refuter working together to prove the goal, but the
above seemed the most satisfying.

So a long story, I'm not fully understanding the proof dynamics and what the
transition system really is. The transition system as presented only simplifies
the interaction of the end result; e.g. for LEM, it starts with the concrete
proof term on the right and the abstract refutation on the left, and then maintains
the contradiction invariant. It seems to say something about the above sort of
interaction that is taking place, but I have trouble fitting it completely.
Is there a way to ascribe semantics to this so that the dynamics, the above
sort of interaction, and the proof tree all come together?

I don't know if I have just read too much into his words and carried this imagination
too far and in the wrong direction. But this perspective of game semantics is
fascinating regardless, and I wonder where one can go from here.

In closing, (I believe) the law of excluded middle has a proof *in* the system
simply by virtue of the contradiction semantics in the metatheory, rather than this
concept of "lying"; because the rules of the game themselves allow one to hypothesize
the existence of both proof and refutation right from the start, in the abstract
secretive sense of above. Is this right?
