# October 18, 2016

Speaker: Nicholas
Topic: Inductive and Coinductive types

# Questions

- Given an inductive type, there would be an induction principle with which we
  can use to prove properties about values of this type.
  For coinductive types, the values are represented by the value's current
  state and "destructors" that pushes the state further and extracts some
  useful information. Do we have coinduction principles that let us prove
  properties of coinductive values? What would they look like? Is it about
  showing the property holds for all possible ways to destruct a coinductive
  value?

  [SCW: yes, there is a principle of coinduction. However, in stead of using it
  to prove properties about natural numbers, you use it to generate relations
  between numbers.
  See: http://adam.chlipala.net/cpdt/html/Coinductive.html]

- Since the evaluation of coinductive expressions never terminate, and
  different constructors might yield the same results, how do we define the
  equality between coinductive expressions?

  [SCW: You can't write a function to determine whether two conats are equal.
  However, you can define a (coinductive) equivalence relation that captures
  what it means for two conats to be equal, and then prove that certain conats
  are in this relation.]
  
- My question for tomorrow’s CIS 670 lecture is: What does coinduction mean in
  the logic side?

  [SCW: coinduction is a principle of logical reasoning, just like induction.]

- What would a termination proof look like for the language M? Bob says it's
  "beyond our current reach," but what's out of reach about it (other than, I
  don't know how I would start, off-hand)?

  [SCW: take a look at the exercises for Ch9, which walk through a termination
  proof for System T. This will get you started...]

- This is the first time I am seeing coinductive types, so the question is
  very basic. Inductive types are defined by specifying how one can form
  elements of that type. By looking at the example of 'stream', I think that
  coinductive types can be defined as entities whose parts satisfy certain
  properties. As such, one can't enumerate a stream in the way we enumerate a
  list like [1;2;3]. This agrees with the fact that coinductive data types are
  infinite data types. Another way I think about this is, inductive data types
  are nothing more than what we get from the ways in which they can be formed,
  and coinductive data types are nothing less than everything that can be
  destroyed such that the properties specified of the parts are
  satisfied. Have I got the right intuitions?

  [SCW: Yes! You are on the right track. Inductive sets start with nothing and
  then build up the set through addition. Coinductive sets start at everything and
  define the set by elimination. ]

- In such discussions of least and greatest solutions to type equations, it's
  frequently mentioned that there might be other solutions, neither least nor
  greatest. However, these non-extreme solutions are never specified. Are they
  ever interesting, and if so, how?

  [SCw: see below]

- Is there any way to characterize the possible solutions to type equations
  (as in section 15.4)? Are there solutions other than the purely inductive or
  purely coinductive ones?

  [SCW: yes, sometimes there are fixed points besides the least and greatest
  ones. For example, consider the tree functor:
    t. 1 + t * t

  The least fixed point (mu t. 1 + t * t) includes all finite trees.  The
  greatest fixed point adds all infinite trees as well. Note that there are
  *many* ways that a tree can be infinite --- all we need is a single infinite
  path in the tree.  So a fixed point in between would add some infinite trees
  but not all of them.  ]

- I am confused about the termination property of M. What does it mean that
  streams are represented as in a continuing state of creation, and not as a
  completed whole?

  [SCW: All M expressions terminate. Even though M can model "infinite" data
  structures, it still limits how exactly those data structures can be used.]

- What is the definition of conat? I am not clear of what Bob says about the
  relation between nat and conat.

  [SCW: If you think of types as sets of values, then nat is the set of values
  that is isomorphic to the natural numbers.  conat adds a limit (omega) to
  this set: a number that is larger than all natural numbers.]

- Essentially what is the decisive feature of a language having the
  termination property?

  [SCW: As far as I know, there isn't a general property, just a lot of ways
   that termination can fail. There are a lot of subtle paradoxes that prevent
   languages from having termination property. ]

- In what sense are coinductive types dual to inductive types? (category
  theory?)

  [SCW: Notice the symmetry between the intro and elimination forms between
   the two types. The general forms for inductive type is 

       fold :: F (Mu F) -> Mu F
       cata :: (F a -> a) -> Mu F -> a

  and then general forms for coinductive types swaps the arrows around:

       ana :: (a -> F a) -> a -> Nu F
       unfold :: Nu F -> F (Nu F)
  ]
  

- Why do the type operators in the premises of the typing rules for inductive
  and coinductive types have to be positive?

  [SCW: because of the reliance on map, which is defined for positive type
  operators.]

- Could you run a concrete example in class maybe? Maybe nat and say trees? I
  get the impression that this chapter is about pattern matching but I'm
  probably wrong since we've already covered that chapter

  [SCW: please ask for more examples in class!]