# October 20, 2016

Speaker: Yishuai Li

# Questions

## What is polymorphism?

- How to comprehend the value of a all(t.\tau) type? Is it just a function
  from t to e which is typed \tau?

- Impredicativity seems like a dangerous thing that opens up possible
  inconsistencies, e.g. Russell's and Girard's paradox. How does one know when
  it's safe to add impredicativity to a type system, and how should we even
  think about such a type system denotationally?

- Is there a connection between the polymorphic types described in this
  chapter and the polynomial types described in Ch.14?


## Metatheory of System F

- How to prove regularity in the type application case App ?

## Encoding datatypes (and parametricity)

- Is there any way to show the encodings in Section 16.2.1 work (and are in a
  sense faithful), without appealing to parametricity? The encoding for unit
  relies on the fact that the identity function is the only function Vr.  ->
  r, which seems difficult to show without parametricity arguments. Of course
  if we didn't care about our translation being faithful we could have
  translated unit to anything we wanted.

  [SCW: No. We need parametricity for this reasoning.
  See http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/wadler/papers/gr2/gr2.pdf]

- I think of this chapter as the generalization of things that we were doing
  till now. The ad hoc sum, product, natural number types have been defined
  just from function types at the type and term levels. What we thought of as
  isolated things find their place in the spectrum of things. The big
  achievement, I believe, is the parametricity theorem, which says something
  fundamental about the nature of types themselves. The book shows how it
  works, but is there a proof of the parametricity theorem given somewhere?

  [SCW: we'll get to the proof of parametricity in Ch. 48]

## Parametricity

- Does the parametricity theorem similarly apply to rank-restricted fragments,
  so that we also just get "theorems for free"?

  [SCW: I believe so.]

- How would the “free theorems” be useful in practice?

  [SCW: reasoning about the correctness of optimizations, for example]

- I am not clear about the proof of i: forall(t.t->t) being polymorphic
  identity function. Why should we use property to prove that?

- Bob Harper really emphasizes the power of parametricity to reason about
  functions. Like,

        f :: forall a. a -> a

  can only ever be implemented as the identity function. I fail to see what we
  gain from this example.  How is this useful for this example? Or if it's
  not, what are some examples where this property is actually useful?

- I feel like the discussion about parametricity in Section 16.3 glosses over
  most of the main difficulties of the proof. I know we're going to discuss
  this later in the semester, but can you state at a high level how to show
  that any function: i : Vt. t-> t enjoys the property that forall t, P : t ->
  Prop, P x -> P (i[t] x)?

  [SCW: patience....]

## Other

- The rank of a type appears to be counting the complexity of the type in
  terms of quantification and arrows. Why is this important? Are there results
  that actually say something about these ranked types, e.g. decidability?
  Also, negative occurrences always seems to be complicating things,
  e.g. because of contravariance - is this related?

  [SCW: Type inference for System F is undecidable, but Rank 2 polymorphism
  is decidable (as is Rank 1, i.e. the Hindley Milner system).]

- At the  end of the  book, Bob  gave a definition  of "iter" based  on church
  encodings of natural numbers, but the book also has comments on how System F
  is still one step away from being able to evaluate itself.

  Is the missing element general recursion? Why is it not derivable in system
  F? Is the fixpoint operator not typeable in system F? In haskell, by virtue
  of lazy evaluation, we can define something like fix f = f (fix f), which
  has type (a -> a) -> a, can we not do the same thing in System F if we
  introduced lazy evalution?

  [SCW: See: Matt Brown, Jens Palsberg: Breaking through the normalization
  barrier: a self-interpreter for f-omega. POPL 2016].