# Nov 1, 2016

## Stephanie

# Recursive types, PFPL Ch. 20

Note: there is example OCaml code for this chapter in [fpc.ml](../code/fpc.ml)
and in [rectypes.ml](../code/rectypes.ml).

## What are recursive types?

General idea: recursive types are solutions to *arbitrary* recursive equations
such as those of the form "t = t -> t"

In Ch 20, we define these types by allowing types with recursive definitons:

       D, t type |- tau type
		 ---------------------
		 G |- rec (t.tau) type      (note: more common to use "mu" instead of "rec")

The "rec (t. tau)" type is a finite notation for an infinite type, i.e. a type
defined by recursion.

For example, natural numbers can be defined as

         rec nat.  1 + nat

And a lists can be defined as (for any a)

         rec list. 1 + a * list

We also add typing rules for "folding" and "unfolding" these recursively
defined types:

        G |- e : [ rec t.tau / t] tau
		  ----------------------------------
		  G |- fold{t.tau}(e) : rec (t.tau)       (note: more common to use "roll"
		                                                   instead of "fold")

        G |- e : rec (t.tau)
		  ----------------------------------
		  G |- unfold(e) : [ rec t.tau / t] tau

- Several times Bob Harper has mentioned "... fixed point of type operators up
  to isomorphisms". I don't actually know what this means. As in "up to". How
  do we work up to isomorphisms?

We want to think of "rec" as a way to "construct" types, not as an actual type
former.  The fold/unfold terms (along with the {t.tau} annotation on fold) are
there to make type checking syntax directed. Semantically, we want to think of
types as "equal" to their unfoldings. i.e. there should be no difference
between the types

        rec nat. 1 + nat

and

        1 + rec nat. 1 + nat

So the fold / unfold are witnesses to the isomorphism between these two types.
The benefit of working with iso-recursive types is that type checking is
simple: we know exactly what type

Note: it is possible to design a type system where fold/unfold is unnecessary
and these types are equal according to the type system. i.e. language
*equates* a type with its unrolling.  In this case we say that

      rec a . t === [ rec a .t / a ]

In fact, we can even do so and retain decidable type checking. See OCaml's
"rectypes" flag.

- Could you discuss the connection between recursive types as presented in
  PFPL and types in object oriented languages such as Java and C++, where you
  typically don't see explicit (or implicit) fold and unfold?

Recursive types exists in many languages. For example, datatypes in ML /
Haskell we have

         nat = unit + nat

         list = unit + nat * list

         value = int + bool + (value -> value)

In imperative languages, we often see recursion in "struct" definitions

         struct tree = { int v; tree next; }

In OO languages, they may show up in encodings of classes:

         class ListNode {
			    int v;
			    ListNode next;
		   }

In both ML based languages and OO languages, we typically do know where we are
introducing a value of a recursive type, typically using a data constructor or
a class constructor. These constructors take the place of "fold" when it comes
to type checking. (And also the type annotation on the introduction rule for
sums in the case of datatypes.)

## Semantics of recursive types?

- What exactly is a fixed point of a type operator, especially since types
  aren't sets? We can't just say its the smallest set satisfying satisfying
  such and such relations can we?

Ch 20 gives an operational semantics, but what if we were concerned with a
denotational semantics? If we think of types as sets of terms we have trouble
when we interpret fcuntion types as sets of functions... with recursive types
we may need to find a set such that (for example)

     A ~= A -> 2

In classical set theory, we know that if A is countable there can be an
uncountable number of functions on A, so it is troublesome to make these two
sets isomorphic.  Bob, however notes that we shouldn't be thinking of sets of
arbitrary functions---we should only be thinking of sets of computable
functions. And there are only a countable number of those (i.e. we can
represent all computable functions as programs, and there are a countable
number of programs).


- The introduction to the chapter says, "type equations involving functions
  have solutions only if the functions involved are partial." Why is it so?
  Also, can you take up some type equations and discuss their solutions?
- Why does Bob say that type equations involving functions have solutions only
  if the functions involved are partial?

Good question. We have type equation that we want to solve:

     t ~=  t -> t

And we know that we can solve it in a setting that can only express
*computable* functions. 

So why do we need partial functions? We know that PCF can express *all*
computable functions, so that is a good setting.  But what about a system
that includes all computable *total* functions?

Perhaps the answer lies in the fact that if we can solve this equation, we can
necessarily write an interpreter for the untyped lambda calculus, which gives
us partiality.

## Defining inductive/coinductive types with recursive types

- What is the advantage of/motivation behind thinking of types as fixed points
  of type operators? What sort of types can and cannot be "constructed" this
  way?

Much of this chapter is examples of code that you can write using recursive
types. 

- what is the restriction on the type operator?

Bob is talking about the positivity / negativity restriction from chapter
15. In this system, we can define inductive and coinductive types with
recursive types. See fpc.ml.

- Could you make more explicit the connection between this chapter and
  inductive and coinductive types as presented in Chapter 15? Does the
  translation require you to add generic programming to your language?

Yes, I think that you still need map for the general construction. See fpc.ml.

- Why define FPC when we already have definitions for inductive and
  coinductive types in Chapter 15? Is it just to demonstrate applying the PCF
  definitions to the type level, or is there some advantages of FPC over the
  definitions we have seen in Chapter 15?

Part of this goes back to the discussion in Section 19.5. There is a
significant difference between partial and total languages. However, once you
have embraced partiality, you don't need to define inductive/coinductive types
separately.

- I've been trying to puzzle out a more formal understanding of how strict
  positivity prevents non-termination from being introduced. I understand how
  you can't construct the data type `self(t) ≅ self(t) -> t` without dropping
  the positivity requirement, and how this construction leads to general
  recursion. What I don't formally grasp is how we can show that there is no
  other way general recursion might arise in a typed language with only
  strictly positive data types and no value-level self-reference. Is this even
  the case?

Yes, with strictly positive datatypes and no fix, you have a total language,
for example, Coq. However, the argument is subtle.

## strict vs. nonstrict

Note that, as usual, there are two different semantics for recursive types,
based on whether we want a strict or a nonstrict interpretation. Our choice of
operational semantics determines the semantics of recursive types, which many
of you picked up on.

- My question is why do type equations have unique solutions in the setting of
  partial functions?

- Could you clarify more about how the lazy and eager dynamics influence on
  the meaning of recursive types?

- My main question is about the expressiveness of eager vs lazy dynamics. Is
  the point he's trying to make that lazy semantics can be encoded within the
  eager language itself by thunking while in a lazy language we need an
  external construct to enforce strictness (like ! in Haskell)? Or does he
  mean that bang (and similar constructs) can never really encode eagerness
  completely because of some more fundamental reason I'm missing?

- In Ch20.2, we know that both nat and lnat satisfy the type equation
                 r ~= [z ~> unit, s ~> r]
  What relation between the two types can we derive from such satisfaction?

In total languages, we distiguished between inductive and coinductive types
because there were multiple solutions to the fixed point equations such as:

       mu nat. 1 + nat

Should this type include an "infinite" number (like conats) or not?
What is this number? (Note, we can define fix in this language, see below)

       fix (\omega:nat. fold (Inr omega))

However, given the presence of ! in Haskell and the strange semantics of
OCaml, I'm not sure that things are as clear cut as Bob claims.

## Defining fixpoints with recursive types

- Bob Harper says, "... general recursion may, like other language features,
  be seen as a manifestations of types structure rather than as an ad hoc
  language feature." I would hoping you could elaborate and talk about this
  (if there is anything interesting to say about this statement).

I think Bob is saying that everything interesting in programming languages can
be thought of in terms of types.


- Also, what (dis)advantages does PCF have over FPC?  Are FPC and PCF as
  expressive as each other, and how can we tell whether they really are
  equivalent in this sense? It seems to me that they are equivalent but I
  don't really know how one would go about formulating that statement and then
  prove it.

This chapter shows one direction --- FPC is at least as powerful as PCF
because we can define fix using recursive types.  To show the other direction,
we need to argue that recursive types do not make the language more expressive
than PCF. I think we could do that by implementing a FPC evaluator inside PCF.

## Defining state with recursive types

- Why does Bob say that we need full recursive types to implement the RS-latch
  at the end of the chapter? It seems to me that this is a strictly positive
  coinductive construction, and so shouldn't need arbitrary recursive types.

I'm also confused about the point of this example. I think a better example
would be to define a Heap data structore for a state monad. If we want to
store functions in the heap, then we need a negative occurrence to define the
type structure.

      Heap := label -> Val                   --- finite map from memory locations to values
      Val  := Int                            --- numbers
            | (Val, Val, ...)                --- tuples
            | Val -> Heap -> (Val, Heap)     --- store passing function


- Bob gave an example of RS latch implemented with self-reference at the end
  of the chapter. Is the idea of state here similar to what imperative
  programming languages have? My understanding is that this is more like a
  stream-based state, where new states are unrolled at each step. Is this
  related to the other kind of "state"?

- Could we go over the latch example together? I'm not sure I get all the
  details, especially with how recursive types are needed. I would also like
  to see the "bigger picture" of the link between statefulness and
  recursion. For instance, would there be a (somewhat) mechanical way of
  translating a stateful computation to a recursion-based one? Or is it only
  for feedback-y systems, like the circuit we're using here? It'd be really
  cool to encode an arbitrary stateful computation (that doesn't necessary
  exhibit (explicit) feedback) in a recursive one.
