# Nov 15, 2016

PFPL Ch 46
Speaker: Stephanie

potential proposal: skip chapter 47 so we can spend more time on this chapter?

# Notes

This week's subject: program equivalence. Today, System T.

We are going to define what it means for programs to be equivalent. We will
focus on two definitions:

"observational equivalence"

and

"logical equivalence"

These two definitions of equality are equivalent to eachother. However, they
work in different ways. 

Note, there is a [Coq script](../code/Ch46.v) to go with this chapter.


# Questions

## What is Kleene equality?

- Bob mentioned that the transitivity of Kleene equality follows from
  determinacy of evaluation. Why does the transitivity rely on the
  determinacy?

  [SCW:  Say you know that

         e1 ->* j /\  e2 ->*j   and e2 ->* k /\ e3 ->*k
			
  Transitivity requires showing some common number i such that e1 and e3
  both evaluate to it.  However, if evaluation is deterministic, then because
  e2 evaluates to both j and k, we know that j=k. So we can use that.]

- How do we define the equality between non-determinate programs?

  [SCW: If we don't have determinism, then we need a property called confluence.
  This property says that even if two evaluation sequences diverge, there always is
  a way for them to come together.]

## What is observational equivalence?

- This chapter discusses the equivalence problem on system T with eager
  dynamics. However, how do we consider the equivalence problem for languages
  with lazy dynamics?

  [SCW: we can do so similarly, but perhaps we may not have access to the
  "proof by nat-induction" Bob refers to in 46.8]

- Why do we define observational equivalence using holes and program
  contexts. It seems more complicated than the type of program equivalence
  defined in the Software Foundations book:

   Definition cequiv (c1 c2 : com) : Prop :=
      ∀(st st' : state),
         (c1 / st ⇓ st') ↔ (c2 / st ⇓ st')

  [SCW: This is a good question. The answer depends on the observations of the
  language. In SF, only the final state of the computation is observable.
  However, in this language we don't have state, we only have results. If those
  results are ints, then we can compare them. But what if they are functions?
  How do well tell if they are equivalent? In that case, we need to "observe"
  them by applying them to arguments until we get ints out that we can
  look at.]

- One of our theorems states: "Observational equivalence is the coarsest
  consistent congruence of expressions". What does it mean by "coarsest"?

  [SCW: Coarsest means that this one equates the most it can, while still being
  consistent. ]

- I am not clear about why theorem 46.6 can license the principle of proof by
  coinduction.

  [SCW: See TAPL 21.1

  Suppose you have a monotone function, F : Set -> Set. We'll call F
  a generating function. Now consider the follwing definitions.

     A set X is a fixpoint   if F(X) = X.
	  A set X is F-closed     if F(X) <= X
	  A set X is F-consistent if X <= F(X)

  The Knaster-Tarski theorem states:
     - lfp(F) is intersection of all F-closed sets  (i.e. mu F)
	  - gfp(F) is the union of all F-consistent sets (i.e. nu F)

  This gives us the principle of induction:

     If X is F-closed, then mu F <= X

  And the principle of coinduction:

     If X is F-consistent, then X <= nu F

  How does this relate in this case? Suppose we want to show that two
  expressions are related --- in other words, that the pair (e1,e2) is in the
  observational equivalence relation. We can do this via the principle of
  coinduction if we can find some F, such that observational equivalence is
  nu F, i.e. the union of all F-consistent sets.
  We then only must show that the set {(e1,e2)} is F-consistent,
  i.e. {(e1,e2)} <= F{(e1,e2)}.	 

  However, I'm a bit stuck here.  An F-consistent set in this case
  should be any consistent congruence relation. But I'm not sure how to
  derive F from that.  ]

- Could we perhaps go through what exactly does Bob mean by a "coarsest"
  relation in class? And what does being the coarsest have to do with the
  principle of proof by coinduction?

  [SCW: see above]

- If possible, I would love to have more precision about why th. 46.6 permits
  proof by coinduction (2nd paragraph of page 439). I possibly have some
  remote intuition about why this would be the case, but I'm really not sure
  about that - so a clear and precise argument would be very helpful

  [SCW: see above]

## Definition of logical equivalence

- At the start of Section 46.2 Bob talks about classifying uses of expressions
  of a type into active and passive uses. How does the definition of logical
  equivalence correspond to this intuition? I don't quite see the connection.

  [SCW: Look in 46.8 --- we define equivalence at function types in terms
  of applications (of related arguments). What if we wanted to add products
  to System T? How would this definition change?]

- I'm not sure how the distinction between active and passive uses of an
  expression is playing out in the definition of logical equivalence. Could
  you go through that in the lecture?

  [SCW: see above]

- Generally, how can you tell when proving a theorem that you need logical
  relations?

  [SCW: Hmmm.  Good question.]


- Shouldn't Kleene equality suffice for System T since every program
  terminates? Seems like the extra book-keeping arguments that we used in the
  proof of termination like open hereditary termination are being replicated
  with logical equivalence in some way e.g. open logical equivalence...

  [SCW: Yes. The termination proof is essentially the same proof as our proof
  of reflexivity for logical equivalence. However, logical equivalence gets
  us more than kleene equivalence. For example, it justifies the equivalence
  rules in 46.4. These rules don't fall out of kleene equivalence.]

- In fact, I'm not even sure that I understand the real difference between
  logical equivalence and hereditary termination. Also, why is logical
  equivalence a family of relations satisfying the conditions described? Does
  he just mean that any relation on closed typed expressions which satisfies
  the conditions described is a logical equivalence, or that logical
  equivalence is actually a family of relations? Why the use of the word
  family?

  [SCW: See above. The connection you are seeing is real. Bob uses the word
  *family* because it is a relation indexed by types. Kinda like
  overloading. ]

- I'm having a hard time seeing how termination (46.15) is an immediate
  corollary of reflexivity.

  [SCW: See the Coq script. Reflexivity is a bit of overkill, the important
  thing for termination is not that all elements are related to themselves,
  but that all elements are related to something.  The definition of this
  logical relation only includes terminating expressions.]


- Also, (minor), is "closing substitution" a widely used term? I feel like I
  needed to use it quite a few times in the past (especially when talking
  about valuations/random generation) and I just ended up describing it in a
  couple of phrases.

  [SCW: I've seen it used before.]

## Connection between observational & logical equivalence?

- I cannot follow some of the proofs such as theorem 46.20. Could you give a
  bigger picture of the proof of logical and observational equivalence
  coincide and how each Lemma can contribute to the final proof?

  [SCW: I will try in class. Also see the Coq script.]

- Could we go over the proof of coincidence of logical and observational
  equivalence? Indeed, while I could follow the individual arguments while
  reading, I feel like the presentation of this part is a little messy; it is
  hard to get a good global view of the argument(s)/proof without re-sketching
  it oneself

  [SCW: ditto.]

- This chapter shows that observational and logical equivalences are the same
  for system T. Is this true for any system in general? If not, can you give
  examples of systems where observational equivalence implies logical
  equivalence but not the other way around and vice-versa?

  [SCW: It is true for this system and also will be true for PCF and System
  F. In fact, we would not define logical equivalence unless we can show it
  equivalent.]

- What’s the relationship between logical and observational equivalence in
  general? Is there a language setting such that observational equivalence
  does not imply logic equivalence, or that logical equivalence does not imply
  observational equivalence?

  [SCW: see above]

- I don't understand the real difference between logical equivalence and
  observational equivalence. In particular, I don't understand why/how they
  could fail to coincide in any reasonable programming language since both
  logical and observational equivalence boil down to Kleene equality on base
  types. Is there a true statement which is proved much more naturally using
  logical equivalence instead of observational equivalence or vice versa?

  [SCW: see above. In practice, if you want to show that two terms are
  equivalent, it is easier to use logical equivalence because you do not have
  to quantify over all contexts. ]

- What is the intuition behind using logical equivalence to simplify
  observational equivalence. Is there any other relation that can do the
  similar thing?

  [SCW: Hmmm. ]

